One, two, three, four, testing. Murray, now you
say something. Hello, hello, I'm here.
This
is September the 12th, and I have the pleasure and
honor of chatting with the postdoctoral role
while I join the faculty at Cornell. Dr. Morris
Bloodworth, who was head of the department at
Texas A&M during those years and who had served on
my master's committee, had told me at many
professional meetings that it was just a matter of
time until he would recruit me back to Texas A&M for
faculty. So after I'd been at Cornell five years,
Dr. Bloodworth came along with a faculty offer. By
that time, I'd developed quite a good feel for
Cornell. Really was uncertain about whether I
would be granted tenure there or not and knew if I
was not going to receive tenure, the decision
would be a very easy one. But
if I actually served on the Cornell faculty as an
associate professor for two months, I'd have to go
back to Texas A&M. That was probably the hardest
professional decision I've ever made. You can
look back even to this day and wonder, I guess, in
some respects, whether it was the right decision
or not. A lot of things played into it. We were about
1,800 miles from my family, and we were 1,000 miles
from my wife's family, and they were 1,000 miles
apart. And that made any kind of, well, it took all
the vacation. We had in the summer in those days
with young children to, we'd spend three weeks
vacation and we'd spend about half of it on the
road. And so that was a strong motivating factor. I
did not know whether my wife, who was a native of
Wisconsin, whom I met during my Ph.D. years,
more familiar with the soil than the state, and to
interact with Dr. Dixon, who preceded me here by
about two months. So we had the same kind... We had
the same kinds of research interests. Well, it
really...
And then Chambers County, I remember, down on the
Gulf Coast, and those were all one-week stays and
seen very extensively. Those would come during
what we call a final field review for the survey of
those counties, the soil survey. So you go to all
the parts of the county and you see the major kinds
of soils that occur in that environment and
discuss all of the different controversies about
how to classify them. and their uses and
limitations and that kind of thing. That was an
extremely fortunate to have that luxury and time,
I suppose you'd say, in the first year. But to this
day, I use a lot of slides in teaching the
introductory soils course that I got in that first
nine months I was here. And not to mention just the
knowledge and appreciation for the variety of
soils in the state. What else did you learn about
the people of Texas and their variety from those
weeks? Well, I don't know if, of course, I grew up in
Texas, and since I went to A&M, I guess you could say
I had classmates from all parts of the state. One of
the things when I first began teaching that truly
shocked me was the variety in terms of origin of
surnames of students I had in class in Texas as
compared to New York State. If you'd asked me
offhand, I would have said there would have been a
lot greater cultural diversity in the student
body at Cornell University than there would be at
Texas A&M. That's not the case. There's a much, I
immediately encountered so many different from
all over Eastern Europe and Germany and those, not
to mention the Hispanic influence here as
compared to New York. So, about the only thing you
could say is that at Cornell, in contrast, would be
a much greater Jewish presence among the students
at Cornell than here. I didn't recognize, at that
time, I wouldn't have recognized a Jewish surname
from any other name, but I had a lab technician who
was quite good at it and had some prejudices, so he
didn't hesitate to express his feelings about
some. Incidentally, the Jewish students at
Cornell were outstanding students in the
classroom, exceptional students. Describe your
getting settled into the department. Where was
it, about how many people, who were the key leaders
of the department in 1968? That became head in 1963
and continued in that role until 1979, so he was
obviously the kingpin in the department at that
time. Actually, the department probably had more
graduate students at that time than it has today.
The faculty was not as large, although it, Dr.
Bloodworth hired his first faculty member, I
believe, in 1964 or five. And in 1968, counting
faculty here and off campus, I believe there were
five or six employees in that year alone. And then
continuing through the mid-'70s, there was a
considerable addition to the faculty in terms of
breadth of expertise in soil science as well as
other disciplines. So that was a period, well, a
period for the entire university, but it was a
period of very rapid growth for the department,
and I think that was primarily his leadership. I
think almost anybody, even today here, would tell
you that Morris Bloodworth and, as I mentioned,
O.D. and maybe Perry, they've got the lion's share
of the increases that were enjoyed during those
early years. George Kunze had already moved to the
graduate college when I got here. Jack Ruckles was
soon to become director of Water Resources
Institute, so Jack would have been a leader, but
gosh, there were a number of other faculty
members. About how many
total? On campus, probably, and this is a wild
guess, I don't know, probably 30, I'm guessing,
30. What do you think the national reputation of
the department was then? Not very good. I think you
could generally say that for most, but by that
time, by that time, recognized as an
up-and-coming place. Because we'd already, by
that time, just beginning to see really the
takeoff that stemmed from all the, all the
decisions that Dr. Rudder was instrumental in
making and bringing to fruition. So the
enrollment was definitely on the upswing,
beginning to hire faculty, having a lot of
retirements of some people who had done, had
performed yeoman service, but of an entirely
different type than faculty to give you any kind of
national presence would give. Where were you all
located and what were your facilities? Well, the
department's always been in several buildings.
As large a facility as we have now, you'd think we'd
all be in one building, but we aren't. At that time,
I was housed in what is now the Butler Building. It
was known then as the Gromby Building. And the
building next to it, we referred to as the old red
brick building, and most of the soils faculty were
in that building. Now, that's over near the
system? Yeah. The Butler Building is the, is kind
of across from the old physics building and the
trigon, the old theory science building. The one
with the big columns in front, you look down at the
MSD area, you look right into the Gromby Building.
And the old red brick building, it's no longer red,
but it still stands, was immediately next to that
one on the northwest side. So it would be, in a
sense, further up the street toward the Cushing
Library at that time. So we occupied primarily
those two buildings. Shared the state chemist at
that time was in the old red brick building. In
fact, it was called the state chemist building.
But a lot of the soils faculty were in there. It was
a, it was a dungeon. No air conditioning, no
central air in any of those buildings at that time.
All window air conditioning. Where were the labs
that you and other, and your colleagues used for
your instruction? Well, the lab that I used was on
the first, in the kind of basement, half basement
in the old Gromby Building. I mean, it had windows,
but it was mostly below ground, half and half. The
man who had been teaching in that position had,
well, it really wasn't his first love. He'd taught
a senior level course before teaching that. He was
known for being reasonably cantankerous. And
then there was a fellow that preceded him, his
nickname was Whiskey Jack. Guys used to talk about
finding him inebriated on lab benches at times. I
would say that basic soils course, which is very
important in the entire agricultural activity,
it
needed, it needed some attention. And the lab was,
oh, it was in pitiful shape. And my predecessor was
in it through the fall and spring of 1968-69. And my
first teacher, my second teacher was in the summer
of 1969. So I had, I couldn't, I didn't have any
access to the facility until he was gone. I think
it's fair to say I've never worked harder in my life
than I worked that summer. As you, during that
first year, what kind of advice did anyone give you
about being a faculty member here or anything like
that? Did anybody give you any guidelines or rules
or? No, you know, I don't remember being given a lot
of advice. I guess I probably got as much advice
from Dean Kunkle as anybody, although I didn't
spend a lot of time with Dean Kunkle. But he was
always philosophized with you a little bit. Dr.
Potts, of course, was an institution at that time
in the College of Agriculture as Associate Dean.
And I'll have to give, I'll have to give him a lot of
credit in this sense. In those first two or three
years, he encouraged me to go to regional teaching
workshops. And anything that came up that I think
he thought would be any kind of help or guidance in
teaching, he was very eager to encourage you to
take part in it. Dr. Bloodworth would always
support him, but he'd never think about having
somebody look. For those kinds of opportunities,
Dr. Potts did. And so he had a major role in getting
me out to learn about developments in the
technological aspect of the teaching at that
time. And was extremely supportive. Within the
department,
actually the man I followed had been the graduate
advisor for the department. And in addition to
teaching the undergraduate course, I almost
inherited that role. And that meant almost from
day one, while I didn't have graduate students
myself, other than some, well, I did have a few, but
very few along. But basically, I interacted with
all of the faculty in that role as graduate
advisor. So I had a lot of opportunity to interact
with other faculty members across a pretty, I mean
our department represents a wide variety of
disciplines. So I had an opportunity to interact
with a lot of people that I wouldn't have
otherwise. What was it, now you were a former
student from this department. Did that turn out to
be an advantage, a disadvantage, or a mixed
blessing as you were a young, new faculty member?
It was obviously an advantage in getting a job in
the first place. I don't think it had anything to
do, most... None of the veterans came in to talk
down to you or anything? No, no. A lot of them, so
many of us were at the same time. What did you and
your colleagues think were the unspoken,
unwritten guidelines about when you went to work,
what you wore, how you did your job? What did you
assume were the guidelines for you as a
professional? Well, I expect most of us thought we
ought to be at work at 8 o'clock in the morning, we
ought to stay there till 5, and obviously all of us
were 12 month employees. So we thought unless it
was a holiday or we were on vacation, we should be
there. And how did you... Now the dress was,
I think most of us always wore a tie when we were
going to the classroom. But a lot of the work of
faculty in the department has always been field
oriented. So I think it's always been acceptable,
if you were not in the classroom, to dress
casually. And you're, beginning in 69, what were
your responsibilities for courses and so forth in
the early years? What courses were you to teach?
Oh, well, you know, this is, but pretty much
throughout my entire career, my major
responsibility in teaching has been one course.
It's been the introductory course in soil
science. What number? Agronomy 301. Did it have a
nickname among the students? Well, I've heard it
referred to as Murray Milford's Magical Mystery
Hour. Okay, okay. Some of the students went out one
year and bought t-shirts and came back in with them
on. They had Milford's clods on the back of their
t-shirts. And this is normally to juniors? It's a
junior level course. Okay. But it's taken by
anything from sophomores to graduate students.
And probably most of those, most of the years I've
taught it, it's been maybe more juniors than
anything else. But next to that, seniors. And it
almost ranged all the way from, I guess, when I
first started, around 100 students a semester.
We've always taught it fall, spring, and summer. I
have not. I've not missed since,
well, since the summer of 69, I've not missed a
summer, fall, or spring to teach that course. Now,
when enrollment, the enrollment went as high as
426. And I had them all that semester. Shortly
thereafter, we were able to add some faculty. So
there have been a couple of other people who have
taught the course. And this is the basic course for
anyone majoring in soil and crop sciences. And
what else? It's been a required course. Of course,
it's required for all the students that are a
major. But it's been a required course in many
other disciplines over the years. Not as many
today as in the past. But when I came here, it was
required for all students in animal science,
recreation parks, horticulture,
agricultural education, range land ecology and
management. It would have been range science back
then. Plant science is strongly recommended in a
couple of areas in ag economics. Wildlife and
fisheries required in part of their programs.
Always had some students from geology. Some study
in earth science for teaching purposes. No
engineers, no M.E.s. No agricultural
engineering was required in ag engineering. Oh,
okay. What were, as you started out in that course,
what were your private guidelines for how you were
hoping to do the course? For you as a teacher, what
was your philosophy?
I really don't know all the things that shaped how I
put the course together. I suppose you could say I
was strongly influenced by what I found at Cornell
when I began teaching there. The textbook used for
the course there was, at that time, called Buckman
and Brady. It goes back into, the textbook is now in
its 12th edition, I believe. It goes back into the
1920s, probably. And Dr. Brady was the department
head, actually. He moved to the department head
when I became a member of the faculty. But we
alternated teaching that course there. One
fellow taught it in the fall. I taught it in the
spring. And then we alternated in the summer to
teach it. And this fellow had more experience with
that course than I did. But we met together every
summer and went over the content of the
laboratory. He has a laboratory with him. So he, in
effect, re-did the laboratory exercises every
summer. And so I had a chance to make inputs into
those. So I guess the content was pretty much
shaped to that. Although the fellow that I took
introductory soils from at Texas A&M was a man
named Hank Foth. F-O-T-H. F-O-T-H. He was only at
Texas A&M three years when he went to Michigan
State, which I believe was his alma mater. He spent
the rest of his career there. He gave, I thought he
was an excellent teacher. Subsequently, I think,
Michigan State proved that. He wrote a textbook as
well. His textbook, I got a lot of ideas from. But it
was not nearly as old, meaty is probably the right
term, as the one that we had at Cornell. So I used,
but I took ideas from it. And that's how we
developed the course. And I would say that it's
not, as far as the organization and topics
treated, it's not changed substantially over the
years. With the big emphasis on behavioral
objectives or instructional objectives, it was
beginning to be a big deal in the late 60s and early
70s. I totally did instructional objectives,
which I had not done before. Somewhere
early on. And I, do you know, right now, I'm not at
all sure whether I started doing it at Cornell or
not. But I think maybe I did. Remember, I was on the
faculty there from 1963 to 1968. It was during a
period, Vietnam, during a period where I think
faculty became very hesitant to say anything
controversial to students. You weren't supposed
to. I,
I'm not, and I'm not honestly not sure. I'm not sure
when I started doing it. But I started early on to
think that in addition to trying to teach subject
matter, cognitive and subject matter, the
faculty member had about as much responsibility
to try to be a witness to life, philosophize a
little bit about life and what it's all about. So I
would always editorialize. And when I started
doing this, I'm not sure, but I did it at Cornell. I
know the idea for doing it was developed there, and
I think I probably did. So I always tell my classes
the first five minutes are mine. We talk about
whatever we want to. You know, this semester I've
already talked about bonfire. I've talked about
credit cards and their use. I've talked about
alcohol. I've talked about silver tabs being an
important tradition, urging to participate.
I've talked about being environmentally aware.
Take trash out of the classroom. Close doors
behind you when you go in and out of bed. So I've done
that kind of thing. All, all. Yeah, and I have a, I
have a final editorial that runs about 25 minutes,
which is, that's the only time that I make any overt
statement about being a Christian, but I do in that
final 25 minutes of class. What's been the
reaction, you think, over the years? I don't have
any comments about the editorials on the course
critique questionnaire and anything else. I
guess we'll get somewhere between two and five
comments in the vein of, I'll pay my money to take
soil science, I don't care to hear your
philosophy. I've never been bothered by those
because I feel like at least once or twice I've
pricked them in a pretty sensitive spot. Did you
have, in all of your teaching, did you have any role
models that affected the way you did it? Probably
my mother and dad. Okay. Bigger role models than
anybody. I come from a family of teachers. My
mother was a teacher. Her sisters were teachers.
Her brother was a teacher. So there were four of
them. They were all teachers.